okay so let's continue our study of
sequences
of real numbers
so
um
so we've seen special
types of sequences monotone sequences uh
before and then in the
previous lecture
we looked at
sequences obtained from sequences
[Music]
namely the sequences that give you the
limb soup and limb imph and we showed
that these are actually limits of
subsequences
now i'm going to define what looks like
a new class of sequences
but we'll see it's actually not these
are called koshi sequences
so
koshi not kauchi
not kachi
koshi french guy so it's pronounced
koshi
and probably not even pronounced like
that is probably
[Music]
got a different pronunciation
by people who actually speak french
so what is the definition of a koshi
sequence koshi sequence is
um intuitively it's a sequence so that
um
if you go far enough out in the sequence
any two entries in that sequence are
close together
okay so
convergent sequences had the property
that if you go far enough out
the l the entries in the sequence are
getting close to a real number
koshi sequence is that any two entries
are close to each other so
so a koshi sequence
we say a sequence is
koshy
if
for all epsilon positive
there exists an m natural number
such that
if n is bigger than or equal to m
and
k is bigger than or equal to m
then
x n minus x k is less than epsilon
so maybe not let me not write if i mean
it's the same statement but since it
looks look so it'll look a little more
like previous uh
uh statements let me put it for all
there
so uh you have
a definition here
you should
um
it's a definition of a new uh
thing
you should now try to look at
an example and then possibly negate the
definition to see if you really
understand it so an example of a koshi
sequence
is
x of n equals 1 over n our favorite
sequence
so let's prove this
we have to so all we have is the
definition so we have to verify
that x of n equals 1 over n verifies the
definition of being
so just like when we try to prove
something is convergent it's which is a
for all epsilon statement
uh the first thing you have to do is let
epsilon be positive
and then i have to choose m and show
that that capital m produces this
statement here
so
choose
m a natural number
so that
one over m is less than epsilon over two
so i could phrase that as capital m
being bigger than two over epsilon but
i'm going to phrase it this way
now we have to show that it works namely
if i take n bigger than or equal to
capital m and k bigger than or equal to
capital m and this difference is less
than epsilon
then
if n is bigger than or equal to m
k is bigger than equal to m
and i look at one over n minus one over
k
this is less than or equal to by the
triangle inequality the absolute value
of
each of these added together which is
just 1 over n
plus 1 over k
and since these are both bigger than or
equal to m this is big each one is less
than or equal to
one over m one over m
so i get two over m
which
by our choice of m is less than epsilon
okay
so
x sub n equals 1 over n
is an example of a cauchy sequence
so let's negate the definition
and then we'll
[Music]
obtain uh look at an example of a
sequence which is not cauchy and as
you'll probably guess if this is our
favorite sequence which converges this
our favorite sequence which doesn't
converge uh will be an example of a
sequence which
um
is not koshy and this should shouldn't
come as a surprise because
again
a sequence which is koshy if you go far
enough out any two entries
are close to each other okay but if we
look at for example the sequence minus
one to the n which is just minus one
plus one minus one any two entries
will
differ by
or you can always choose two entries
that differ uh by two
and
distance so let's negate this definition
to um get what it means for something
not to be koshy
so
now write all that out
um
x sub n is not koshy
if
so every time we see it for all it
becomes there exists
if there exists a bad epsilon not
positive
such that
for all
m a natural number you can find two
entries further out than m
that are within that are greater than
epsilon not distance to each other so
there exists n
bigger than or equal to m
and k bigger than or equal to m
such that
x sub n minus x of k
is bigger than or equal to this bad
epsilon
okay
so again i mean the
definition of koshi means that as long
as i go far enough out uh
in
the sequence
this distance is supposed to be less
than epsilon so for all epsilon positive
there exists a capital m so that i have
this picture if i choose x sub
uh k plus one then it should also be
uh within distance epsilon to x sub n or
x sub k
so they're getting closer and closer
together the negation means that they're
not getting closer and closer together
to each other so there exists some
small distance so that you can always go
as far out as you want and find two
entries
that are greater than epsilon not
distance to each other
so what's an example of that
like i said
the sequence minus one to the n
is not koshy
okay
that looks
that just doesn't look right there we go
now it
is
okay
so this is not koshy so that means there
should exist some bad epsilon not so i
can go far enough out
so i can go as far out as i want and
find
two entries in the sequence
differing from each other by epsilon not
in distance so
basically any two entries other than
you know i can always find two entries
in the sequence which differ from each
other by
uh two so that'll be my bad epsilon not
so
like here's a proof
choose epsilon not equals
2.
let m be a natural number so now we have
to find
uh an element of this uh entries in the
sequence further out than m whose
distance to each other is bigger than or
equal to two we can just take m plus one
uh and capital m
choose n equals m
and k equals n plus one
so these are both bigger than or equal
to m
then
minus 1 to the n
minus 1 to the k
this is equal to
1 minus minus 1
after i factor out a minus 1 to the
capital m which equals 2.
okay
so
minus one to the n is not koshy
all right so i
at the beginning said that um
this will look like a definition of a
new
um type of sequence but it's not really
so
as it turns out
so the elements of the sequence are
getting closer and closer together
as you go far enough out
so they're all kind of clustering near
each other
which kind of makes you think they're
all clustering near something in the
real number line
and therefore maybe the sequence is
convergent
now
uh this is true and we'll prove this is
that
uh every that a sequence is coachy if
and only if it's convergent
now this is true only for the real
numbers and i'll say a little bit about
this in a minute
or not only true for the real numbers
but it's not true for the rational
numbers
and i'll get to that uh in just a second
so what we're going to prove is that a
sequence is koshy if and only if it is
convergent
so the first thing i want to show
is
that koshi sequences are bounded
okay
so the proof of this statement is
essentially the same as um
as the proof that convergence sequences
are bounded so let me draw a picture
that goes along with this proof
so as long as i go far enough out there
exists
an m so that
for all n bigger than or equal to
capital m i can say this
let's look at this entry x of m
then for all n bigger than or equal to
capital m all of the other entries have
to be within
a certain distance to x sub n based on
the definition of of koshi
so let's say
i make that distance one
and let's say zero's over here just for
this picture so then for all n bigger
than or equal to x sub n
for all n bigger than or equal to
capital m x sub n lies in this interval
here
okay
and therefore
we'll get that x of n is
bounded
so the way this picture looks i'm going
to write it this way
okay
now that handles all n bigger than or
equal to capital m so we just need to
deal with the first capital m minus one
uh
other guys so maybe there's
capital m
minus one is over here
capital x sub 1 is over there capital x
sub 2 is over here so then our bound
will just be
this one which handles all of the n
bigger than or equal to m plus
the
absolute values of these guys that we
missed
okay
all right so
xn is koshy
there exists an m natural number
such that
for all n bigger than or equal to m
k bigger than or equal to m
x sub n minus x of k
is less than one
in distance
so this is certainly true for
k equals capital
m
so this implies for all n bigger than or
equal to m
x sub n minus x of capital m
is less than one so now if i
use the triangle inequality
i can show i that the previous implies
that for all n bigger than or equal to m
if i look at the absolute value of x sub
n this is equal to x sub n
minus x sub capital m plus
capital m
and this is less than or equal to the
absolute value of this guy
plus the absolute value of
this guy and this is bounded by one
okay
so in summary
i've shown that for all n bigger than or
equal to this fixed integer capital m
uh
x sub n
is less than or equal to
uh
x uh capital m and absolute value
plus one
okay
so that's for all little n bigger than
or equal to capital m so now i just need
to pick a big enough number
that bounds the first
capital m
uh
entries that are not covered by this
inequality okay capital m is fixed
all right
um
so
let b be the absolute value of x sub 1
plus absolute value of x sub 2 plus
okay so this fixed number now
then
we're all in bigger than or equal to
capital m i have by
this inequality up here
this is a sum of non-negative numbers so
this number is certainly bigger than or
equal to just this part
and if
i have n bigger
than equal to 1 and less than m
then
x of n
is going to be the absolute value of
this guy is going to be one of these
that appears here which is certainly
less than or equal to if i
uh
add on uh
this number and the others which is less
than or equal to b
okay so now i've found a b which is
non-negative which bounds all the
absolute values and therefore
this proves that the sequence is bounded
um
okay so
we've shown that a koshi sequence is
bounded
and
um
so what uh what i'm now going to show
is the following so
again all of the entries are getting
close to each other they're kind of
clustering near each other so
it kind of feels like they want to
converge
and this next theorem says that well if
you've identified a limit
along a subsequence then in fact the
entire sequence converges okay so of
course this is not true for
an arbitrary sequence if a subsequence
converges
i should say for an arbitrary sequence
it does not it's not true that a
subsequence converging implies the full
sequence converging right we have minus
one to the n
for which
a uh subsequence converges but the whole
sequence does not converge but if we
make the additional hypothesis that the
sequence is cauchy then
the sequence converges if and only if uh
sub that subsequence converges so
um statement of the theorem is following
if x sub n is koshy
and
there exists a subsequence
uh
which is converging to
some number call it x
the sequence
full sequence
converges to x
okay so if i have
so if i what i was saying right before i
stated this theorem is that if i hide
this part and just say there exists a
subsequence which is converging to x
uh this does not imply that the full
sequence converges to x because we have
this example of -1 to the n but if i
also assume the sequence is koshi
then it does follow that koshi plus
subsequence converging implies the full
sequence converges
okay
so i want to show
that xn converges to x so
to show
and we're going to do this just by using
the definition
by verifying this through the definition
not using the squeeze theorem or
anything like that
so
let epsilon be positive
since
x n is koshy
there exists
m naught natural number
such that for all n bigger than or equal
to m
not and
k bigger than or equal to m naught
x of n
minus x of k
is less than epsilon over two why this
epsilon over two well we have
or why should you not be surprised well
we have two assumptions here so
you know like we did when we did uh
convergence of products of sequences and
so on
which include which had two assumptions
namely two sequences converge or
something typically that means we'll
have two integers coming we'll choose a
bigger integer uh and then some of
inequalities to get an epsilon so
uh that's a little bit of a rambling
answer to why
we get an epsilon over two here
or why we put one there
since
the subsequence
so i didn't this subsequence converges
to x
there exists another integer m sub 1
such that
if
k is bigger than or equal to m sub 1
then
x sub n sub k
minus
x
is less than epsilon over 2. so maybe i
should have used a different
letter here let's use a little m
so i don't want you to think these have
to be the same k
okay
so now we'll choose an integer bigger
than both m1 and
m2
and show that it works choose m to be
m naught plus m one
then
now we need to show this works
and if n is bigger than or equal to m
so
uh
this
so let me actually
make a first observation before i go to
the n bigger than or equal to capital m
then simply because we um
and since n sub k
is bigger than or equal to k
for all k a natural number just because
the n sub k is there an increasing
sequence of integers
uh which starts at least at one
and since uh n sub k is bigger than or
equal to k for all k this implies that
the integer n sub capital m
is bigger than or equal to m which
remember is m0 plus
m1 which implies that
n sub m is bigger than or equal to m0
and n sub m is bigger than or equal to
m1 okay so i just wanted to make that
this
preliminary observation and now we'll go
to showing that this capital m works
so now if n is bigger than or equal to
capital m
and look at x sub n minus x an absolute
value and add and subtract
x
sub m capital
m capital m minus x
and use the triangle inequality
then
okay so since
n is bigger than or equal to capital m
which is bigger than or equal to m0 that
means n is bigger than or equal to m0
and then n sub m we just showed is
bigger than or equal to m0 so by
this inequality i get that the first
term is less than epsilon over two
and
now n sub m
okay so
m is certainly bigger than or equal to m
sub one
and therefore
um
i will get that this part
is less than epsilon over two because of
this inequality
okay so
uh that capital choice of capital m
works
and now
we'll prove the following that
a sequence is convergent if and only if
it's koshy
okay
all right so this is a two-way street so
we need to show the left
implies the right and then the right
implies the left
okay
all right
so
um
this direction is
in fact easy
uh based on what we've done i shouldn't
say it's easy but but what we've done so
far it quickly follows um
so we're assuming x of n is koshi
i'm trying to show its convergent
then so if x of n is koshi this implies
that x of n is bounded
the sequence is bounded
which implies by the bolzano virustras
theorem
that x of n has
a convergent
subsequence
and by the theorem we just proved if a
cauchy sequence has a convergent
subsequence
it must be convergent
now for the converse direction
that xn is convergent implies um
xn is koshi well i mean so this should
not come as a surprise let me draw a
picture
let's suppose
x sub n is converging to x
and epsilon is positive
then since the x ends are converging to
x
if i go to
if i draw a little
interval around
x of
length total length epsilon so x minus
epsilon over two and x plus epsilon over
two
then i will find as long as so then
there exists
m
so that for all
n bigger than or equal to
capital m all of the x of n's lie in
this
interval yeah
they all lie in this interval because
they have to be within distance epsilon
over 2 to x okay
if the x ends are converging to x
and since they line this interval the
distance between any two of them can
only be as big as the length of the
interval which is epsilon
all right
so
uh this is essentially the picture of
why a convergence sequence has to be
cochise so now let's turn this picture
into math
we have to verify that
we have to verify x and this cauchy
through the definition that's all we
have so let epsilon be positive
since the x ends converge to x
there exists an integer m sub zero
natural number
such that
for all n bigger than or equal to m sub
zero
x sub n minus x is less than epsilon
over two
[Applause]
uh
and so we'll choose
the m for our definition of koshi to be
this m sub zero
and if n is bigger than or equal to m
and k is bigger than or equal to m
and i look at the absolute value of x
sub n minus
x sub k and add and subtract x
and use the triangle inequality this is
less than or equal to x of n minus x an
absolute value plus x minus
x sub k
each of these
is less than epsilon over two
since n is bigger than or equal to
capital m and k is bigger than or equal
to capital m so this is less than
epsilon over two
plus epsilon over two
equals epsilon and therefore x n is
coshi okay
now
i want to
make a brief remark about the previous
theorem um
so remember how this whole story started
off we were
there was something wrong with the
rational numbers
namely they didn't contain the square
root of two
so we couldn't solve you know the
algebraic equation x squared minus 2
equals 0.
but this also then turned into
the rationals
not being
complete in the sense of order not every
bounded set
non-empty bounded set has had a supremum
it didn't have the least upper bound
property
but
you can also interpret this lack of
having square root of two
as uh
somehow saying that the rationals are
incomplete in this sense so
uh hopefully by hopefully at the end of
this class we'll be able to get to
metric spaces but
so what do i mean by that let's say i
look at this statement now within the
universe of uh
rational numbers so
so now
if this sequence is
rational numbers meaning
sequences are only sequences of rational
numbers limits are only
elements of the rational numbers
epsilon is only a rational number and so
on then
you know we still have many of the same
theorems that we proved not all of them
and i'll indicate which ones don't hold
but if we only work in rationals then we
always do have uh
convergence
implies
koshi meaning convergent sequences are
koshi okay
but
koshi sequences
are not necessarily convergent okay
again
what's what's the example here
what's the intuitive example take x sub
n
uh
so that x of n is
in q
and
now viewed
in uh
the universe of real numbers x of n's
converge to root two
okay
then such a sequence would be a cauchy
sequence okay
i mean we just proved that basically
um so such a sequence would be a cauchy
sequence of rational numbers
however it would not converge
in the set of rational numbers it would
converge to the square root of two which
is not a rational number
so
because the square root of 2 is not a
rational number
this shows that the rational numbers do
not have this completeness property that
cauchy sequences converge
okay
um
so there's a whole
still to this day kind of industry of
deal of studying spaces for which
uh koshi is equivalent to convergent
these are called complete metric spaces
and then if you add a little more
structure they're called bonus spaces
and so on
which are very important not just in
math but
also for um
formulating rigorously a lot of uh
the underlying um
uh assumptions in
uh for
mathematical physics
but
um
so for if we're just looking inside the
rationals it does not follow that cauchy
sequences always converge okay and now
let's just stop for a minute and take
stock of why this was true for the real
numbers okay what did we use going back
so
if you think if you really go back to
the proof of the bolzano virustras so
that's what we used here right to show
that koshi sequences converge um
we use the fact that the lymph soup and
the limb myth always exists
okay
and limb soup and lemon
you know first off they're defined to be
soups and imps which may not always
exist as rational numbers as we've
already shown so
that that's definitely a problem already
there but even more so you know when we
proved that every bounded monotone
sequence converges
what we showed was that this limit is
actually a soup of a certain set or an
if of a certain set which again may or
may not exist if we're just looking in
the rational numbers because the
rational numbers do not have the least
upper bound property
so it really is the least upper bound
property
that gives us convergence
uh equivalent to koshi
for the real numbers so
um
for r
the least upper bound property
is i mean it has to be because that's
the main thing that separates the two uh
fields so
is
but i'm just reiterating this here
is the reason
why
convergence
is equivalent to
koshi okay
now that i've proved that koshi is
equivalent to to convergence
maybe you'll ask then why did we
introduce it at all
i mean
if these two notions are the same
prove
you know why even introduce them if
they're just convergent sequences
already
and the reason is because
um
you know to show
that a sequence converges you have to
somehow have your hands on
a candidate for the limit right if you
want to
prove that x n converges you have to
somehow come up with an x that it
converges to and it's not always clear
how to find that x okay
um
but koshi although it's equivalent to
convergent in the
set of real numbers
doesn't require you to find a candidate
for convergence
okay all it requires you to do is show
that
you know as long as you go far enough
out
any two entries in the sequence are
close together
okay without requiring you to come up
with a limit see computing limits is
quite difficult we're about to do series
right and there's maybe like
i don't know five series people can
compute explicitly but you do know that
there's a ton of other series that are
actually convergent
even though you don't know what the
limit is and why why do you know that
it's simply this is exactly because and
exactly why
um
people thought of koshi sequences to
begin with much of analysis
so
again just to summarize this um
you know convergent sequences are nice
but
in practice it's difficult to get your
hands on what could be a limit of a
sequence especially if that sequence is
pretty
complicated so if you're trying to show
a certain sequence converges
it suffices by what we've done here to
show that it's koshi
and that's a little bit easier to do
because that just requires you to work
with the original sequence you don't
have to come up with a limit you can
just
take your sequence and start um playing
directly with the entries rather than
try to come up with a limit
explicitly
so
okay so that's what we're gonna
move on to is series now
which
as i said a minute ago is the original
reason why
people
started developing the foundations of
analysis you know what we're talking
about right now to begin with
because they were just um
kind of
doing very very formal things that ended
up not making sense like trying to add
up uh
they were adding infinitely many
positive numbers and coming up with a
negative number
that can't be right so
all of this was was
created
discovered however you want to phrase it
to
put on on rigorous foundations
um this next topic which is series
so
and i mean you dealt with series you
know as a in calculus so you know what a
series is
uh maybe you don't remember all the
proofs of the properties of series but
you know
suffice to say this is you know series
is a pretty good motivation since it's
one of the most useful things
that comes out of math i mean series are
how you solve
series expansions or how you solve odes
pd's
you know taylor expansions all these
things
are
in some sense a form of series so being
able to justify them
as as
being real things is um is a necessity
so
the definition of a series for now
is really is just the symbol i'm about
to write down so given a sequence x of n
the symbol
or maybe i'll just sometimes write just
sum x sub n
is
what's called the series
associated to
the sequence x sub n
so right now that's just a symbol
we're going to interpret this as a real
number
in the following situation
we say that
the series converges
so
series converges if
the following sequence
given by
s of
m
equals
so
what is
um
this
so s of m this is the element of the
sequence and what is it it is the actual
sum so this is not a formal thing this
is just a finite sum from n equals 1 to
m so this is
so this sequence now m equals one to
infinity
uh
and
these guys we called
we call partial sums
converges
okay so
right now if we just have a sequence if
we just have a sequence x of n this the
series associated to that
sequence is just a symbol okay we say
that the series converges if the
sequence of partial sums
um
converge
and
if
s is
this limit
and we write s is equal to
the series uh
and treat the series now as a number
okay
so in general if i have a sequence i
just have this formal uh
symbol which i'm writing down which i
call a series associated to it
in the case that the sequence of partial
sums converges then i actually identify
this series with a real number
and treat it as a real number
okay
and
so
the way i've written this the series is
starting at 1 but it doesn't necessarily
have to so
just by
you know shifting the index
so let me just say here
that we don't necessarily
have to start
series at n equals one
okay
so this could be sum from n equals zero
to infinity in which case we have a
sequence starting now at x sub zero all
right or this could be starting at two
in which
place the the sequence of x of n starts
at n equals two and then the sequence of
partial sums would start at not m equals
one but m equals zero or m equals two
okay depending on where the series
starts
okay so some examples
the series
sum from n equals 1 to infinity
1 over n
n plus 1 times n
this is a
convergent series
okay
so why is this so let's look at the
proof so
we look at the nth partial sum this is
the sum from n equals
1 to m
of 1 over n plus 1
in
and this is equal to
now if i
uh
write 1 over n plus 1 times n
as
1 over n
minus one over n plus one this is now
the sum
of one over n
plus these are finite sums
so i can always split them up
should be a minus
and so now this is equal to one plus a
half plus
plus one over
m
minus
one half plus a third plus
one over m
plus
one over m plus one
and you see all of these cancel
and all that's left is
one minus one over
n plus one
so the nth partial sum is equal to one
minus one over
n plus one and therefore
the sequence of partial sums is the
limit as m goes to infinity of this
which is just one
and therefore the sequence conv this uh
series converges
okay
um
now
uh our favorite sequence which does not
converge will give us a series which
does not converge
so let's look at some from
n equals 1 to infinity
minus 1 to the n
this
does not converge
so what's the proof
the nth partial sum this is equal to
uh
minus 1
plus 1
plus minus 1
up until i get minus 1 to the m
and therefore this is always equal to
one of two things
if m is odd
then
i have an odd
number of
these guys
and therefore
the minuses and pluses cancel just
leaving a minus one in the end
this last one the odd one
and m is odd
and zero
if m is even if i've add up an even
number of
uh
these terms then all of the minus ones
and ones cancel out so i just get zero
and
therefore this sequence
which is just minus one for m
odd uh
zero for m even
does not converge
and therefore the series does not
converge so when i write some when i
write this this is just a symbol this is
just chalk on a chalkboard it doesn't
mean anything
[Applause]
all right so let's go
to another
series which does converge and this is
kind of
um
the one to which we compare all other
series essentially as you'll see
um
you know you have all these series tests
that
you remember hopefully from calculus
um
that
tells you when a series converges
but
maybe if you remember the proof or don't
how you do that is you converge it to
one series which you do know how to sum
so it was just by pure luck we were able
to conver you know compute the the sum
or compute the
explicit series for this guy
um
another one which we can do
that for his geometric series so
theorem is
if i have a real number
with absolute value less than one
then
the series starting now at
r to the n
converges and i can actually compute
the sum of this series and this is 1
over
1 minus r
okay
so what's the proof
let's look at the
partial sums and
we can actually compute these as well
just as we were able to do for for the
first example
we compute that the sum from
n equals 0 to m
of r to the m now you can prove this by
induction i think i cannot exactly
remember if i did this
i believe i did in the second lecture on
induction first or second lecture on
induction but if i add up
some number raised to the nth so this
should be to the n
nth power from 0 to m this is equal to 1
minus r to the
n plus one over
one minus r
okay
and
uh
i guess two lectures ago we proved that
if the absolute value
so
let me state this now uh
from two lectures ago
we proved that if
the absolute value of r is less than one
then
limit as
let's make it m
of r to the m
equals zero
which implies that
so this was the nth partial sum
which implies that the limit as m goes
to infinity of s sub m
equals
the limit as m goes to infinity of this
thing which is if you like this is
okay so that plus 1 there just
multiplies r to the m by r
and using the algebraic
facts we proved about limits is one
minus r times zero over one minus r
which equals one
over one minus r
okay
so now you ask about the other um
what about r bigger than
one
well when r equals minus one
then we get the
second example we looked at
if we get r equals one
um then that's just summing up one
and you leave it to you to check that
that does not converge
um that the sequence of partial sums if
i just sum up one from n equals 0 to m
is
equal to n plus 1
which does not converge
all right
and let me make just a kind of silly
comment
and maybe i didn't explicitly make this
comment about uh sequences maybe i
forgot to do that as well so
um
for a sequence
a sequence so you could
start your sequence not necessarily at
the first entry maybe you look at
a if you like new sequence where
uh
well
okay so we know from sequences that
subsequences of convergent sequences
converge so
if i
instead of looking at the whole sequence
start at
let's say x 100 and then go x 101 x 102
and that's the sequence i look at well
that's a subsequence of the original one
which
if it converges implies that subsequence
converges so all that is to say
and
for this simple way
of obtaining this new sequence all
all of that is to say that
to
understand if a sequence converges i
don't have to consider what happens for
the first uh
finitely many uh terms in the sequence
meaning um
you know a sequence x sub n converges if
and only if
uh
a sequence starting now at say n equals
100 100 100 200 so 103 and so on
converges okay and the same is true
for um series that
uh a series converges if and only if um
you know
a series converges now starting at a
different uh point along the sequence so
this is a
following theorem
let x in be
a sequence
and let
capital m be a natural number
then
n equals 1 to infinity of x sub n
this converges
if and only if
the sequence
now starting at capital m
converges meaning when i have to decide
whether a series converges or not it
doesn't matter
uh what's going on for the first
finitely many terms
okay what matters is what's going on as
i keep
uh
you know adding terms from further and
further out of this sequence
um
and what's the proof the proof is just
expressing the partial sums for this guy
in terms of the partial sums for this
guy
so
partial sum satisfy for all m
sum from n equals 1 to
m and now
x sub n
as
sum from
n equals capital m
to m
x sub n
plus sum from
n equals um
1 to capital m minus 1
x of n okay so this is now just a fixed
number
so
this is the sequence of partial sums
corresponding to this this series this
is the sequence of partial sums
corresponding to this series and this is
just a fixed number
therefore if this converges
then
this side converges to this plus this
fixed num this
so maybe i'm going a little quick but
so if this converges then this converges
to this minus this number
and if uh this converges then this
sequence of
partial sums converges to this limit
plus uh this fixed number okay
and that's all i'm going to write
okay
now coming back to
the usefulness of koshi
sequences
[Applause]
i mean this is kind of where they
really become useful
it's in the study of series
because again it's difficult to sum
so when i keep talking about saying the
word sum a series i'm talking about um
you know find the limit of partial uh
partial sums
um
but because we have this equivalence
between cauchy sequences and convergent
sequences
um
to decide if a series is convergent or
not um we can just
decide if in some sense it's it's koshi
or not so let me make this um
definition
we say that a series
x of n
is koshy
if
the sequence of partial sums again these
are
um
i'm just going to put a m up top
because this may start at 0 or n equals
1 or something so
the sequence of partial sums
is
koshi
okay
and so let me just uh
restate what we proved for sequences in
terms of series so we proved that every
koshi sequence is convergent so
a series is koshi
if and only means that the sequence of
partial sums is koshi but we've proven
that koshi sequences are convergent so
if this is koshi
then it's convergent and vice versa so
based on what we've
proven already for sequences
it follows that
and this just follows immediately from
what we've proven already so i'm not
even going to write a proof
a series is koshi if and only if
series is
convergent
again because both are defined in terms
of the sequence of partial sums
associated to the series and we've
already proven the equivalence between
koshi
and convergence
for sequences
now
let me write what it means to be koshy
in a slightly
uh
different way
and it's the following so
so
um before we had
that a sequence is koshy intuitively if
the elements of the sequence are getting
close to each other now for a series to
be koshy
uh the intuitive way to think about it
is that the tail
of the sum is getting small okay
it's uh arbitrarily small
tale of the sum being if i add up um
finitely many numbers uh far enough out
so
a series is koshy if and only if
for all epsilon positive there exists a
m natural number
such that
uh
for all integers l
bigger than m which is bigger than or
equal to capital
m
sum from n equals
n plus 1 to l
of x of n
so this is a
sum involving terms that are pretty far
out they're at least all
um
indexed by something bigger than or
equal to capital m
is less than epsilon okay so
a series is koshi if you're kind of
adding up smaller and smaller pieces not
individual pieces but actual like adding
those up
[Applause]
okay so
i'll leave it to you to do
kind of
i mean they're both pretty easy but this
direction um
i'll leave it to you as an exercise and
it'll follow immediately from what i'm
going to write for
essentially this direction
um
so let's suppose
uh and
let's make things concrete starting
somewhere let's suppose this sum is
koshy
and we want to prove now that it has
this property
okay
so let epsilon
be positive we now want to produce some
capital number m so that this holds
[Applause]
so since
the sequence of partial sums s sub m
is koshi
that's what uh it means for the series
to be koshi
there exists
a natural number capital m such that
um
for all
m bigger than or equal to m naught
and
l
uh
bigger than or equal to m
naught s sub m minus s sub l
is less than epsilon
so let's uh
we're actually going to take capital m
to be this m naught choose
m to be
m naught
then if
l is bigger than or is bigger than m
which is bigger than or equal to m
naught
uh bigger than or equal to m which is
equal to m naught
if i look at this sum
from n equals
n plus 1 to l
x sub n
i can write this
so this is absolute value
so in fact let me remove the absolute
value so that this becomes pretty clear
i can write this sum as the elf partial
sum
minus the nth partial sum
right because the elf partial sum sums
from n equals 1 up to l
the nth partial sums from n equals 1 up
to m
so the sum containing only the terms
between n plus 1 and l is the difference
of these guys
so now i'll put on absolute values
and this thing because l and m are
bigger than or equal to capital m which
is equal to m naught and because i have
this inequality this is less than
epsilon okay and the converse direction
again it follows immediately essentially
from
this
equality here
all right
so to check whether a series converges i
don't have to somehow come up with a
limit for this series a sum for this
series
i can just show i can just prove that
kind of the tail can be made arbitrarily
small as long as i go far enough out
in the series
okay
and from this we get a
pretty simple
elementary
property so theorem
if
a series converges
then this implies that
the limit as n goes to infinity
of x of n
of the sequence
you use to obtain the series equals
zero okay so this should you know fall
in line with
um
you know a series being convergent if
and only if it satisfies this property
here
right which is somehow saying
uh the tail of the sum is getting
smaller and smaller
which means you can't be adding up big
things uh
um
as you go on out in the in the series
so proof
um so we'll show this by um
a
simple epsilon delta or epsilon m
definition
so
suppose x in
converges
then
x in
the
series is cauchy
and now i'm going to verify
this using the epsilon m definition
let epsilon be positive
since xn is cauchy
this implies that there
exists a natural number
m naught
such that
for all
l bigger than or equal to m bigger than
or equal to m naught
i have that condition there sum from
n equals m
plus 1
to l
x sub n
is less than epsilon
choose
m to be m naught
plus one
okay this so y m not plus 1 but not
exactly and not just because
um basically what i'm going to do is i'm
going to take l to be equal to m plus 1
and the index gets shifted by 1.
then if
m is bigger than or equal to m
i get that the absolute value of x sub
m
so i'm
maybe i'll
instead of saying limit as n goes to
infinity i'll write limit as m goes to
infinity it's just the change in the
dummy variable this is equal to
um
sum from
n equals
m to
m
x of n
and now so i've shifted this so now
little m is bigger than or equal to
capital m naught plus one
um
so you could write this as if you like m
minus one
plus one so little m minus one
is bigger than or equal to m naught
so by this inequality this is less than
epsilon
okay
and
so
we see that if a series converges the
terms the individual
terms x sub n
must converge to zero
so there's another reason why
this series minus 1 to the n does not
converge
because those terms do not converge
um
this also tells us that for this
geometric
series when r is greater than
or equal to one an absolute value the
series does not converge
does not converge okay and the proof is
um
and we proved this uh
in fact um
i think a few lectures to go a few
lectures ago as well that
um if the absolute value of r is bigger
than 1
then
limit as n goes to infinity of r to the
n
this
limit does not exist
we showed
it's in fact unbounded right this is r
to the n is an unbounded
sequence
so
does not converge so
i'm using that theorem over there in a
little bit roundabout way let me uh let
me state
let me restate this theorem over here
this theorem says
if
the series converges then
the series uh the lim this limit equals
zero
now this statement is logically
equivalent to
uh
the negation of the converse
or or the um
there's an actual word for that but i i
can't remember
namely
that
uh the negation of this
implies the negation of this
okay
so
a logically equivalent
way to rewrite that statement over there
is that
that
if this limit does not equal to zero so
if it doesn't exist at all that's also
fine
this implies that
does not converge
okay so you know this
um
restatement of the theorem over there is
really what i used to to prove
uh is really what i used here
okay
all right and i think i'll stop there um
next time we'll see
that this theorem here
is a one-way street and i think you
covered this this example and probably
calculus namely that um
one-way street in the sense that if xn
converges then this limit is zero
but the converse does not hold
namely it is not true that if the limit
at this limit is zero then this
converges okay and we'll see the
famed harmonic series next time